We will live in a world which is more
volatile, which is more prone to shocks
and which has clearly fragmented under
our eyes in the last few years.
>> Is this just because of the cycle of
humanity?
>> There's probably something much deeper.
I hope we come to a moment of reckoning
where we realize that there is only one
planet that the distribution of revenue
is clearly important and where we have
to live in a society that is not utterly
divided and hostile to each other
>> and thank you so much for joining us.
I'm so delighted to to first of all be
in your home at the ECB.
>> Welcome. and to have welcome you.
>> Yeah, it's beautiful view from here. You
have over there the financial district
of Frankfurt. And the point about this
building is that it should not be right
in the center of the financial district.
It should have its distance because it
is in charge of monetary policy. It's in
charge of supervision and it shouldn't
be too close to them.
>> Christine Lagarde is one of the most
powerful women in the world.
>> I try to look at things in a very
positive way and focused on my mandate.
She spent her career steering countries
through crisis.
>> We're in this together. We will come
through it together.
>> First as French Finance Minister,
>> Madame Christine Leard,
>> then as International Monetary Fund
Chief.
>> My hope is that growth picks up and that
jobs can be created.
>> Now at the European Central Bank, her
job is to keep the continent's economy
stable.
What did you learn about yourself in
becoming ECB president? You were seen
actually as an outsider because you
weren't really an economist and you
weren't a former central banker.
>> You know, I' I've often been an
outsider. So, I've I'm used to it. And I
think that what I've learned in all
those situation is that you have to work
very hard not to catch up because you're
never going to catch up. You're never
going to reinvent yourself, but at least
to not be fooled by people who will try
to pull wool over your eyes by using
jarens or theories or quoting so and so.
And second, you have to be surrounded by
a team of people that you trust,
competent in the fields that you are
short of.
This building isn't a bank in the normal
sense. It's where Lagard's team set
interest rates for the continent. What
they do directly makes Europeans feel
richer or poorer. The ideal is when
inflation is near 2%.
>> At two.
>> Who's the two chooser?
>> You know 2% is something that you know
goes reasonably unnoticed as long as
wages progress as well.
>> Each Euro's own country has a central
banker and they all come together at the
ECB.
How do you find consensus at the
governing council level? I mean, is it
right actually to always try and find
consensus in in terms of just mechanics?
>> You know, not not always. There there
are times and there are, I'm sure,
circumstances or sectors where you have
to just drive through and and be this
authoritative uh leader who is going to
carry the day and ignore completely what
the views of others are. It's just not
my style. And so far it has it has
served me reasonably well even in times
of crisis when you've established your
leadership notably by respecting the
views notably by being tolerant notably
by listening to what people have to say
in times of crisis when you have to move
fast and people will go with you and
they will respect you.
>> This is what about values? Is it your
your value system? Is that how you want
to lead because of of what you think is
right and just or or does it deliver
just better results? I think it's rooted
in my values and in my personal
background. Yes.
>> What was your childhood like?
>> My childhood was by the seaside,
happy. Both my parents were professors.
So there were lots of books in in the
house. A lot of activities, a lot of
intellectual concerns quite early on.
music played an important role and where
we were lucky to have opera singers and
musicians around and I always remembered
one lovely conductor who explained to me
you always have to be one step ahead
when you conduct the orchestra. If you
are riveted to the music and you're not
one step ahead, you're going to miss
getting the violin started or you're
going to miss getting the drums on time.
So being one step ahead and thinking,
okay, I'm going to this meeting to deal
with this issue, but what do I do next?
And how do I prepare for the next one?
And on and on and on.
Lagard went on to study law and secured
a job at US firm Baker McKenzie.
By 1999, she'd moved to Chicago to work
at their head office as chair.
This was at a time when 91% of partners
there were men.
What did that feel like?
Prima inter Par Paris very much. And
that was the philosophy of the firm that
every partner had a voice and whether
you were a partner in Rome, in Hong
Kong, uh, in Beijing or in Cairo or in
Chicago or New York, your voice mattered
in the same way. And I think that
influenced my leadership later on. It's
not a question of the credit that you
get, but it's a question of moving
forward and moving together.
>> How do you do that? listening a lot,
talking a little, um, trying to
understand the motivation,
trying to see where the vested interests
are and and debunk or or, you know, fix
things along the way and moving on.
>> Lagard's talent did not go unnoticed. In
2005, she was invited to leave the
private sector and join French politics.
So, did you think back then that you
would go into politics?
>> No, absolutely not.
>> I got a call from the prime minister at
the time, so Dominic Deville, who said,
"We need a trade minister. You have no
experience in politics, but we think
that you would be the right person. Can
you consider?"
I said, "Do you lead that group as a
team? And is there a good team spirit?"
And I was naive and didn't know anything
about politics. And he said, "Oh, yes,
absolutely. Of course, this is a team."
I said, "Okay, all right. I'll
consider." And I guess I have a little
bit of time to think about it. And he
said, "Of course, but I don't put the
phone down."
>> So, it was short thinking time.
>> I said, "Yes." I said, "You are
irresistible." And I'm saying, "Yes.
perseverance.
>> How can you tell if someone's a team
player?
>> Is there the the Lagard test on whether
you can work with someone or want to
hire someone?
>> Well, first of all, I learned how not to
believe what people say. I observe
sometimes the way in which people behave
without them knowing. you know, in a in
a meeting, in a conference, at at a
table, I look at how people behave and
relate to each other, and I can tell one
from the other. And those who want to,
you know, sort of show off and and
display their talent or who pretend that
they are good team players by repeatedly
mentioning, you know, so and so and so.
And I can feel it.
>> First, she served as Minister of Trade,
then Minister of Finance. Globalization
is not something that you can either
deny or challenge.
French banks will do well under the
stress test that they are currently um
going through.
>> I wanted to contribute. I wanted to
serve because I I thought it was
warranted. Europe was being questioned.
There were lots of things in flux and I
thought, "Okay, maybe I can help."
>> Months into the job, Lagard faced her
first unfolding global crisis.
A black Monday for European stock
exchanges. Investment bank Layman
Brothers insolveny is weighing heavily
on Europe's big markets, Paris, London,
and Frankfurt.
Do you enjoy making a difference in
chaos?
>> We saw the financial crisis arrive in a
way and there were not many people who
could see it. Those of us who could were
trying as hard as possible to fix it and
put a stop to certain things but it was
rolling. It was, you know, fire under
the under the ashes.
>> This is what financial Armageddon looks
like. Red screens that scream sell,
sell, sell.
>> We had not anticipated that it would be
as bad as that. We had not anticipated
that liquidity just vanished from the
surface of finance around the world. But
in times like that, I generally stay
calm. And it's not that I enjoy crisis.
maybe second nature or DNA or or my
background or whatever, but I together
with other key finance ministers, we
tried to keep the boat afloat.
When the global recession hit Europe,
heavily indebted Euro area countries
struggled to borrow as their finances
worsened.
By 2010, investors no longer believed
the Greek government could repay its
debts. At this point, the ECB, the Euro
area, and the International Monetary
Fund all stepped in.
>> Mr. Carpenter, do you think that Europe
has done enough to help Greece today?
>> It's clear will both to stabilize uh the
Euro zone and Greece,
>> but loans came with strict conditions,
forcing deep cuts to government
spending. As the economy shrank,
protests broke out on the streets. It
was against this economic backdrop that
in 2011, Lagard took over as managing
director of the IMF.
Her first task, contain the crisis, then
negotiate additional emergency loans.
>> The negotiations with Greece were very
difficult. With hindsight, is there
anything that should have been done
differently?
>> The negotiations were very difficult
because we were not prepared for that.
The Euro area was a monetary zone. We
shared the same currency. We had in
principle the same fiscal principles and
rules which of course had not been
respected by some countries but Greece
in particular. The difficulty of
transferring liability and assuming
collectively the mistakes of one country
was just not in the cards and that's how
the IMF got involved because they the
Europeans amongst themselves did not
have the will or the or the tools to
actually rescue one of their members.
Still, the IMF and Europe faced
criticism for how they handled the
crisis with some saying they made the
recession worse.
The purpose of what we're doing
altogether is to actually restore the
stability of the economy in Greece and
we will continue to work.
>> Did it change you as a European? Did you
become more European in terms of what
you thought was the way forward for
Europe as a continent and a block? Yes,
it did because the Greek crisis helped
us put the finger on what was missing
and how much progress we had to make.
But it was also a confirmation that we
were in this together and that there was
no way one country could exit because if
one country could exit, all countries
could exit and the group was gone.
>> Do you have an internal balance in a
crisis?
I think it's a balance that I have all
the time. And in times of crisis, you
you you put to a a bigger test. I do
enjoy this difference between the
excitement, the fear, the anxiety, and
the fact that you can sort of draw on
your own strength, on your resources, on
your breathing to actually bring about
some calm.
>> Was there ever a day where you thought
of quitting? Any job?
>> No, I don't think I'm a quitter.
I can move. I can escape. Uh, but I'm
not a quitter. No.
>> Lagard had developed a reputation as a
crisis pro and a consensus builder at a
time when the EU faced deep divisions.
That's why she was appointed to lead the
ECB in 2019.
>> It was a challenge. It was Europe. I was
always under the impression that it was
a 5-year term and I hadn't checked. So,
having said yes to Macron and Merkel, I
said, "Oh, okay. Well, I'll be in
Frankfurt for 5 years. And at that
point, Mron said, "No, for 8 years, but
it was too late."
Soon after becoming president, she faced
a global pandemic. Supply chains froze.
Demand collapsed. Then,
Russia launched a full-scale invasion of
Ukraine. Energy prices soared. Food
prices too. Inflation rose to five times
the ECB target across Europe. Today,
Europe's yet to bounce back. Inflation
is under control despite what some saw
as a delayed ECB response. And now the
economy is growing more slowly than
global competitors.
It it feels like it's it's a difficult
moment for Europe. Europe used to be the
industrial prowess of the world and now
Europe finds itself between the US and
China with many challenges on
competitiveness on productivity.
>> How do you fix it? So the beauty of
Europe is also the plag of Europe.
Beauty of being together, being
tolerant, respecting views, elaborating
consensus, moving the needle a bit and
respecting the democratic foundations
and being in all this together. That's
the beauty of it. But if you have to,
you know, keep all that and yet make
very fast decisions and implement and
conduct change, this is hard.
In the valleys outside Stoutgart, winter
mornings start quietly,
>> but at the Bosch car parts factory,
workers are protesting.
This is one of several car part
factories in the region preparing to
shut down.
The auto industry makes up almost a
quarter of Germany's exports, but the
global trade ties it once relied on are
starting to fray.
toilet
mark.
Asian suppliers are exporting large
volumes of equivalent cheaper parts to
Europe, squeezing the margins of local
manufacturers.
Bar said its Vibingan plant isn't
competitive and plans to cut 13,000 jobs
companywide, adding it's seeking
solutions that are as socially
acceptable as possible. Almost 100,000
German auto jobs are expected to be lost
by 2030.
The people who stand here today, they
know this town will really go down if
that factory closes its doors.
>> Europe's shrinking industrial base is
reshaping its politics.
Disillusioned workers are part of a wave
of voters turning to populist parties
which are gaining ground across the
continent.
How much do you worry about populism in
Europe? Societies that actually I I
guess have stopped talking to each other
because of polarization, because of
social media, because of you know
>> I think social media is a really is a
really important uh point that you
mentioned because they they operate as a
reductor and an accelerator. A reductor
because there's no time for
consideration, thinking, rationalizing,
explaining. Too long, too complicated,
forget it. simplify, get rid of all that
and an accelerator of the forming of the
opinion, the coalition, the conspiracies
that is vastly accelerated by social
media. And populism is certainly growing
and in many European countries we have
populist leaders, right and left, who
are going for the easy target, easy
target, easy reasoning, easy voting.
>> Is it also a lack of leadership in maybe
the, you know, the 80s? I think you're
right to mention the 80s. That's the you
can pretty much date back to the 80s,
the time when the share of wages and
labor declined relative to the share
attributable to to capital.
>> Wages rose in the 80s, but profits grew
even faster. Owners and investors earned
more than their workers. Inequality
increased sharply.
Then globalization put fuel on the fire.
Companies moved jobs to countries with
cheap labor.
>> The assession of China and Chinese
Taipei is a momentous event. Having
these major traders inside will truly
show us at last to be a world trade
organization.
Clearly the role that China played as of
its entrance into the WTO made this
issue of distribution of revenue more
acute. No question. And and these are
the targets for populism. People who
feel that they have been left out, that
they have not benefited from those
movements, that nobody pays attention to
them. And and this is something that
leaders in their respective capacity all
over the world need to address because
we cannot function with societies that
are deeply divided and where a large
majority feels left out. This cannot be
>> these political changes are bringing new
pressures to central banks both in
Europe and beyond.
>> We have a a real stiff at the Federal
Reserve. I can't help that, but he's
going to be leaving soon.
>> Elected leaders from Donald Trump to
Turkeykey's Erdogan to India's Modi have
been steadily attacking the independence
of their nation's central banks.
>> Do you worry about central bank
independence? Real central bank
independence.
>> I think we have to earn that
independence and I think we have to be
accountable for this independence. But
the independence is critically important
to make sure that the decisions are as
unbiased as possible and only determined
by by the you know the macroeconomic
analysis and the the anticipation of uh
what monetary policy will do.
>> Yeah. Because it can't be you know based
on an election cycle.
>> There is a very good reason for that.
Typically monetary policy decisions have
an impact down the road. If I hike, cut
or hold, it's not going to have an
impact now nor in six months time and
probably not even in a year's time. So
the passing of time is something that we
have to take into account. And if in
between you have an election cycle and
somebody who says, "Oh, no, no, you
should do this, you should do that," it
will be completely counterproductive and
and counteryclical. That's the risk. So
central bankers need to have time on
their side which is why most of them
have long-term mandate and take
decisions that have a target in the
medium term not in the immediate short
term because it's not going to work.
>> The the Fed has a different composition
to the ECB.
>> Mhm.
>> Does it make the ECB stronger because
you have one mandate? It's inflation
>> and that's it. At the European Central
Bank, we are privileged in the sense
that the independence is engraved,
embedded, if you will, in the treaty. I
have never received a phone call from
any of the leaders in Europe because
they know that they cannot do it. It's
in the treaty. I don't think that it is
as strongly established from a legal
point of view for uh the United States
or for the UK or for other countries.
You
>> you're you're the woman that they call
in a crisis.
>> Yes. I'm Mrs. Crisis.
>> But you're Mrs. Crisis with a great
sense of humor. Does that help?
>> Always. Yes. In times of crisis, you you
can sort of go so deep and deep and deep
and you you sort of dig the hole in
which you are burying yourself. And a
sense of humor and a good love can just
put things in perspective.
>> Would you consider going back into
politics?
>> No, I don't think so.
>> Why not? So, you said you you wouldn't
be suited to be French president.
>> You know, I've seen
I've seen presidents come and go, and
I've seen them uh age and change. It's
past my bedtime.
>> What will you do next? I mean, there's
always rumors. Do you think about what
you do next or are you focused more in
the in the here and now?
>> I'm I'm here and now, but the the truth
of the matter is that I've always taken
risk.
I've never sort of secured my position
to make sure that the pension was there
and that the comfort was guaranteed and
that I was on a unlimited term. No, it's
sometimes you just have to jump.
>> Madame Lean, thank you so much for
joining us.
>> Pleasure.